---
title: "Limitations and future research"
weight: 22
bibFile: data/modified_bibliography.json
subtitle: true
---

Our model begins with a pre-existing social movement contesting a profession’s jurisdictional control and trying to enroll the profession’s clients into contestation. We do not explain the emergence of the social movement. However, we do explain its expansion as more individual clients come to enact the escape, opposition, and accommodation modes; as well as its stasis, as clients enact acquiescence (although this truce may be temporary given that the critical consciousness of these clients has been raised). We also suggest conditions of possibility for the emergence of a client-based counter-movement when clients enact stewardship. Future research could focus on the process of emergence of a social movement contesting a profession’s jurisdictional control. Such research could inform, on one hand, profession leaders about how to foresee and prevent the emergence of such a movement; and, on the other hand, activists about how to organize the emergence of a movement and mobilize adherents.

Also, we treat all social movements the same―as if their framing efforts were always in support of radical contestation of a profession’s jurisdictional control. Of course, empirically, social movements that disrupt professions, and distinct segments within these movements, can pursue a variety of projects, with intended effects on a profession’s jurisdictional control that can range from transformation to reform. Thus, whereas we explain the prevalence of a mode with reference to the resonance of a particular configuration of emotions in individual clients exposed to a movement-profession framing contest, other explanations could focus on the specific content of frames promoted by movements, and how they evolve over time. For instance, future research could compare the framing efforts of more revolutionary movements disrupting a profession with those of more reformist ones to identify differences in the emotional dynamics and enactment of different modes of client participation. Or it could focus on a single movement to explore the tensions and synergies between segments engaging in different framing efforts. Such research could inform both professionals and activists on how to channel tensions and maximize synergies in ways that result in improved alignment of professional services with client needs.