---
title: 'Modes of participation in jurisdictional contestation'
weight: 21
bibFile: data/modified_bibliography.json
subtitle: true
---

We propose five distinct modes of client participation in jurisdictional contestation and theorize how clients come to enact them. Our model explains how ambivalence emerges and plays out in such episodes. Ambivalence is represented to varying degrees and in specific ways in the modes we call opposition, accommodation, and acquiescence. These modes foreground the role of ambivalence in creating conditions for the reconciliation of diverging institutional projects and negotiation of mutually satisfying arrangements despite divisions.

Also, while we have presented these modes separately from one another, empirical research indicates that they coexist and overlap in diverse ways across multiple clients in episodes of jurisdictional contestation. Indeed, empirical studies of social movements disrupting professions have vividly described the tensions between the segments of clientele who enact radical (i.e., escape and opposition), reformist (i.e., accommodation), and conservative (i.e., acquiescence and stewardship) modes of participation {{< cite "Gould-2009;Morrison-2005;Bayer-1987" >}}. But these studies also showed synergies playing out between segments. Especially, many studies observe that the actions of clients enacting the escape and opposition modes created pressures that forced incumbents to yield, partially or entirely, to the aspirations for recognition and inclusion pursued by clients enacting accommodation {{< cite "Scott_campbell-2011;Maguire-2004" >}}. Our typology of modes enables an analysis of synergies and tensions between segments of a clientele led by different emotional experiences and pursuing different aspirations. It brings together insights from studies of radical contestation {{< cite "Jasper-2011;Taylor-2000" >}} with those from studies of reformist collaboration {{< cite "Decelles-2020;Scully-2002" >}} to highlight how multiple clients may participate differently in a single episode of jurisdictional contestation by enacting a mode that corresponds to their emotional experience.

By conceptualizing these modes of participation of individual clients in collective action, our model suggests that embracing clients’ dissidence and ambivalence towards the profession can help professionals to engage clientele segments in constructive ways that mitigate tensions and tap into synergies. In this way, professionals can channel energy and innovation emerging from clients’ experiential knowledge to align professional practices with client needs. Our model therefore responds to growing practical interest across professionalized work domains, and especially in healthcare, for including clients in collaborative design, governance, delivery of, and research on, professional services {{< cite "Mayo-2021;Boivin-2018;Heaphy-2017;Fayard-2017" >}}. Similar to how professionals incorporate managerial knowledge into their work to defend against jurisdictional contestation by managers {{< cite "Waring-2009" >}}, the incorporation of elements of clients’ experiential knowledge into professionals’ work could mitigate contestation while improving services to clients and shoring up trust in professions.
